Here God's word from Genesis chapter 47.
So Joseph went in and told Pharaoh, my father and my brothers with their flocks and herds and all they possess have come from the land of Canaan.
They're now in the land of Goshen and from among his brothers he took five men and presented them to Pharaoh.
Pharaoh said to his brothers, what is your occupation?
And they said to Pharaoh, your servants are shepherds as our fathers were.
And they said to Pharaoh, we have come to sojourn in the land for there is no pasture for your servants' flocks, for the famine is severe in the land of Canaan.
And now please let your servants dwell in the land of Goshen.
Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, your father and your brothers have come to you.
The land of Egypt is before you settle your fathers and your brothers in the best of the land.
Let them settle in the land of Goshen.
And if you know any able men among them, put them in charge of my livestock.
So Joseph brought in Jacob his father and stood him before Pharaoh and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh said to Jacob, how many are the days of the years of your life?
And Jacob said to Pharaoh, the days of the years of my so journey are 130 years.
Few and evil have been the days of the years of my life and they have not attained to the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their so journey.
And Jacob blessed Pharaoh and went out from the presence of Pharaoh.
Then Joseph settled his father and his brothers and gave them a possession, the land of Egypt and the best of the land and the land of Ramses as Pharaoh had commanded.
And Joseph provided his father, his brothers and all his father's household with food according to the number of their dependents.
Now there was no food and all the land for the famine was very severe.
So at the land of Egypt,
and the land of Canaan languished by reason of the famine.
And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan in exchange for the grain that they bought.
And Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's house.
And when the money was all spent in the land of Egypt and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came to Joseph and said, give us food.
Why should we die before your eyes?
For our money is gone and Joseph answered, give your livestock and I will give you food and exchange for your livestock.
If the money, if your money is gone.
So they brought their livestock to Joseph and Joseph gave them food and exchange for the horses, the flocks, the herds and the donkeys.
He supplied them with food and exchange for all their livestock that year.
And when that year was ended, they came to him
the following year and said to him, we will not hide from my lord that our money is all spent.
The herds of livestock are my lords.
There's nothing left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies and our land.
Why should we die before your eyes, both we and our land?
Buy us and our land for food and we with our land will be servants to Pharaoh and give us seed that we may live and not die and that the land may not be desolate.
So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh, for all the Egyptians sold their fields because the famine was severe on them, the land became pharaohs.
As for the people he made servants of from one end of Egypt to the other, only the land of the priests he did not buy for the priests had a fixed allowance from Pharaoh and lived on the allowance that Pharaoh gave them.
Therefore they did not sell their land.
Then Joseph said to the people, behold, I have this day bought you
and your land for Pharaoh.
Now here's seed for you and you shall sow the land and the harvest you shall give a fifth to Pharaoh.
And four fifths shall be your own as seed for the field and as food for yourselves and your households and as food for your little ones.
And they said, you have saved our lives.
May it please my Lord, we will be servants to Pharaoh.
So Joseph made it.
A statue concerned the land of Egypt and a stance to this day that Pharaoh should have the fifth, the land of the priests alone did not become Pharaohs.
Thus Israel settled in the land of Egypt, the land of Goshen, and that gained possession in it and were fruitful and multiplied greatly.
And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt 17 years.
The days of Jacob, the years of his life for 147 years,
When the times you near the Israel must die, he called his son Joseph and said to him, if now I have found a favor in your sight, put your hand under my thigh and promised to deal kindly and truly with me.
Do not bury me in Egypt, but let me lie with my fathers.
Carry me out of Egypt and bury me in their burying place."
And he answered, I will do as you have said.
He said, swear it to me.
He swore it to him.
Then Israel bowed himself upon the head of his bed.
The grass-withers and the flowers fade, but the word of our God will stand forever, and many may be seated.
Pray with me.
Holy Father, we again give you thanks for your word, your word which guides us, your word which is our source of life,
As we come before this story this morning, I pray that your word, that your spirit would guide us, that you would speak to us, that you would encourage and strengthen our hearts and our faith, that you'd do this.
In the name of Christ, we pray, amen.
You know, one of the strange things that I actually don't mind being a part of,
is our funerals.
And I don't know when the last time last funeral you've been to, but one of the things I always actually appreciate about going to a funeral is it's not just that you're reflecting on someone's life that you're there to mourn the loss of, but you also can't help when you go to a funeral, but think about your own life.
There's a self-reflection that happens, and I always walk away thinking and remembering, oh, I need to be
a better man and you start to think, what are people gonna say about me when it's my turn?
I'm not gonna be there, I'm not gonna know, but what are they gonna say about me?
Oddly enough, when you go to a funeral, it causes you to reflect on death, but also on life, on your own life.
And in this, there's this aspect of death where death is a fantastic teacher for us.
teaches you that, listen, you're not in control of your life.
Obviously, think about what are the things that last and what are the things that actually matter in life.
I think one of our biggest problems though with this great teacher of death is that we avoid this teacher at all costs.
And there's a lot of different ways we do this.
For one, we avoid pain.
We like to avoid suffering.
And we put death in all of its capacity out of sight.
You know, funerals, I mean, where do we bury people?
It's not in the
It's not in the city, it's not next to churches anymore, it's out in the country.
You gotta go drive.
I mean, there's one at our house, which is past like 96th Avenue.
I see these trails of cars go out there for funeral professionals.
It's way out of town.
You gotta go there on purpose.
We put them out of sight, you know, instead of even having funerals anymore, we have celebrations of life.
We don't use the term funeral, it's sad.
We don't say someone died, right?
We say someone went, they passed away.
They're no longer with us.
We can't even say the words.
They're dead.
Instead of having open coffins, we get to come and pay last respects.
What do we do?
We cremate our dead.
Why?
Because it's cheaper.
It's more economic.
It's efficient.
Actually, I was looking at the numbers over the last just 20 years.
The numbers of people who have been cremated went from like 25% to like 65% of all people are cremated now.
This is interesting things.
Why does that happen?
Why are we doing this?
Why do we not have open caskets anymore?
I remember going to my grandma's funeral and my brother told me, he said, that's not your grandma.
She's not there anymore.
And as I've, I didn't really know what to say to that.
I was like, Tim, but now I'm like, no, that actually is my grandma.
She separated the body and soul are separated for the moment, but we are our bodies.
Our bodies is part of who we are.
And instead of like driving bodies, we used to, the church used to escort the body to the grave side.
And where we'd lower them down into the ground and we'd put dirt on them.
Now that doesn't happen.
Right after you have this service where you try not to be too sad, you just remember the good things.
Only the good things, you go and you have a party instead.
The problem is when we avoid death,
Not only do we avoid the great teacher and the teaching that the death has, but our own courage to live in this world and endure it in this world fails.
And fear ends up guiding our lives.
And it wasn't that long ago that this was an unavoidable thing for the people.
I mean, churches used to have graveyards.
I mean, if it was legal, I would love to do that again for one
It'd be our playground.
That'd become weird for the school probably.
For two, we don't have enough room for it.
But imagine how that would change your view of the world when you come to church every Sunday.
And you're like, oh, yeah, that was my Sunday school teacher.
Oh, that guy used to give me candy all the time.
Oh, that was one of our pastors from, it just gives you this long generational, eternal perspective.
I mean, even the early church where they, where did they meet?
They met in the catacombs, which is the place of dead.
And just think about how that formative that is, and we don't run from this.
And this is what death is a fantastic formative teacher that teaches the church how to be an enduring people.
The people with a big long-term vision, to have courage, to have faith, like those who have gone before, that we don't have to fear death.
And in Genesis 47, in this chapter, as I'm reading it, you're thinking to yourself, what is he going to talk about?
The topic that you see in each of these kind of three stories, the drives and narrative forward, is one of death.
You have Abraham reflecting on his life.
You get death in the famine causing people to act in a certain way and sell themselves to Pharaoh.
And then you get the final scene where he's about to die.
And what does he say?
He says, take my bones back home with me.
to chapter of death.
And there is this interesting thing in Genesis that's happening.
Chapter 46, 47, 48, and some of 49, those are like the forgotten chapters of Genesis.
Like if you read your Bible often, you've read these before, but you probably didn't remember what was in them.
I didn't really, and these are kind of fly-by chapters.
And this narrative really slows down too.
And you're like, what is, I forgot that these were in there.
But I have to preach, and so I'm meditating.
I'm thinking I'm listening to other people.
And I was like, oh, there's so much rich stuff for us in these chapters when we slow down.
And so when we slow down this morning and look at Genesis 47, what we're going to learn from this morning is the great teacher of death.
And it will teach us not just how to die well, but how to live well.
And so there's three things I want to focus on this morning that I think death is teaching us about life.
And there are these three things.
At first, that the reality of death humbles with perspective.
The reality of death humbles with perspective.
Second, that the reality of death exposes our dependence.
The reality of death exposes our dependence.
And finally, the reality of death clarifies our hope.
The reality of death clarifies our hope.
So first,
the reality of death humbles with perspective.
Move me back here at verse 47, you get the scene where Joseph is bringing Jacob, his father before the Pharaoh says, and then Joseph brought in Jacob, his father, and stood him before Pharaoh and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
And then later at the end of their conversation, it says that he blesses Jacob, blessed in chapter 10, and Jacob blessed Pharaoh and went out from the presence of Pharaoh.
I don't know if that struck you as interesting,
But here you have Jacob.
He's an old man.
He's nearing the end of his life.
And he's before the most powerful man in the land.
He just entered into this man's land, which you might expect us him to bow to kiss the ring.
But what does he do?
He blesses him.
This is kind of a surprising detail.
because it presumes that you have something that he doesn't have.
Like finally, if you come to me and say, Craig, can you bless me?
You assume that I'm blessing you with something that you need.
So there's this assumption here that the Pharaoh needs something from this old man who just wandered from his land into Pharaoh's land because he was needy.
What makes a little bit even more interesting is a section before what happens is Jacob's sons, his family,
What do they do?
They commit themselves to be servants of Pharaoh, which literally is slave.
So his family just became slaves to Pharaoh.
And now he walks in and what does he do with the presumed authority?
He blesses Pharaoh.
Blesses him twice.
You know, there's this thing for us that, especially when there's someone that has authority over us, we tend to have a bit of fear, don't we?
That person can do what they want, they can fire us, they can harm us.
We tend to have fear of people that are important, but Jacob here, he walks in here, he has zero fear at all.
He doesn't bow, he doesn't kiss the ring, he blesses, he gives.
What's happening here?
How does he have no fear?
Let me see this in verse eight when Pharaoh continues.
It says, and Pharaoh said to Jacob, how many are the days of your life?
And Jacob said to Pharaoh, the days of the years of my sojourning are 130 years.
Fear and evil have been the days and the years of my life.
What's this telling us?
It's telling us, Jacob is in a moment in his life where he is reflecting on his life.
The reality of death, he knows that death is before him.
He's thinking about the end of his life.
And whenever you come to terms with the finality of your life, when you remember in a moment that, listen, I'm not only am I not not only that I'm going to die, but it is, it is a certainty.
You can't escape this fact.
You will die.
I mean, what can the Pharaoh do to him?
He can kill him?
He's like, well, I'm going to die anyways.
And it's coming soon anyways.
It's kind of an idea.
Whenever you reflect on your life, it's like going to a funeral.
You remember how short life is.
I'm not a single day in our life is guaranteed.
And even he talks about how his life is shorter than his father's.
He's dealing with the Ecclesiastes wisdom that all of life is vaporous, which means all of life is we try to grasp onto it.
We try to find something solid in life, but it's temporary.
Everything that we experience here has got a temporary nature to it.
And this is the wisdom that he is experiencing, that he can't grasp life.
And if you think about his life that he's reflecting on, and this life that he calls a few and evil have been his days, let me think about it.
Think about all the life that he has tried to grasp.
He tried to grasp a blessing when he stole it from his brother Esau, and what did he end up?
He ended up on the run for his life, and then he was with Laban, his uncle, and he tried to grasp his wife, Rachel, and ended up with Leia.
Even his family, he tried to grasp his family and his sons, and he lost his son Joseph until now.
And even his land, this land has been promised to his family.
He tried to grasp that, but even that has been taken away from him.
He is reckoning with his life.
He's reckoning with the finality and the temperiness of life.
Once he was a schemer, he was a trickster,
Once he wrestled with God, ruled by desires, blessed me.
And now he's humbled.
By the perspective that life gives you, by the perspective of days and years give you, when you reflect on the end of your life, which you can do, whether you're five or 16, or I'm not going to even try to say the upper end of the ages in this room, probably 50.
That's right.
So that's wisdom is giving me that perspective.
But when you reflect on life, it gives you a bit of perspective to have a bit of humility, humility that you are going to die one day, that you are not going to live forever, that you can no longer depend on your own strength.
The reality of death changes this for you.
It is a great equalizer in life.
It humbles you.
gives you a humility.
And in that humility helps you and enables you to live, I think, fearlessly.
Because you're freed from fear.
He's freed from this desire to try to impress people.
He walks into this throne room like a grandfather, like a great patriarch of the faith.
He knows who he is.
He doesn't need to get his identity from the Pharaoh.
He knows who his father is.
He knows who his God is.
And this makes him
Free to what?
Free to be a blessing.
The question for us is I think where we need to find this perspective is the places of fear for us.
Where are those places where we fear?
Where are those places where we try to manufacture control and life and try to scheme to get our way?
Where are those places where we maybe put up false pretenses and want people to think more highly of us?
When you reflect on death, that your life will not be here forever.
It causes some of those fears to fall down.
It helps you to realize and to remember when you contemplate in your life that death will come for you, you cannot escape it no matter how hard you try.
And that fact will humble you and free you to be a blessing.
Because if you're a fearless and courageous person, you will bless those around you.
And as it gives us humility to face our lack of control in the world, it helps shape how we got to live with the time that we have.
It's the first thing we learn here is that the reality of death.
Death gives you humility with perspective.
Which leads to the second thing that it teaches us that the reality of death exposes our dependence.
Look here, this scene kind of shifts.
In the first glance, it seems like this is like maybe three unrelated stories.
But whenever in scripture you find like a story, a narrative kind of bookended with the same character, it's usually a hint that you should take that all together, which is what we're doing here.
And there's kind of this thread woven through it.
But you see this scene where the famine right there in the middle of this famine, they're not quite through it yet.
And these people come to Joseph and like, hey, we need food.
He said, well, you got to pay for this food, so they pay for it.
And they come back the next year, and they ran out of money.
He says, OK, we can barter, we can trade.
So you take a couple cows, you can get some food.
And they come back again, right?
They're out of money.
They have nothing else to trade.
All they have, this says, is their land in themselves.
And so they sell their land in themselves to Joseph.
And it's kind of an interesting scene.
The more you think about it, the more it's a little uncomfortable.
It's like, that's kind of mean.
Joseph, you couldn't just give them some food.
They're hungry, they're about to die, it says.
It looks like these Joseph is exploiting them, that in their greatest time of need, where they will literally die if they do not eat, this isn't just like they're hungry, they will die if they don't eat.
Joseph's like, don't got anything else where you can sell yourself to me.
It seems like he's exploiting them.
to the point where they're like bias and he does.
And it's an interesting scene.
The reality of death is before them.
And in the reality of death, what do they do?
They make themselves dependent on the state.
We're now even in perpetuity, they're gonna owe one fifth of their produce to Pharaoh.
Again, this sounds harsh, it sounds cruel.
Sounds like he's taken advantage of him, but look at how they respond.
Look at how they view this.
Verse 25, it says, and they said, you have saved our lives.
May it please my Lord, we will be servants to Pharaoh.
Does that sound like people who are bummed out?
Does that sound like people who have been taken advantage of?
No, they didn't look at Joseph like a great exploiter or a presser.
They look at him as a savior.
This is not exploitation.
This is actually mercy.
and kindness.
Especially in this ancient day, this is how debt would work.
This is how slavery would work.
It would be like, hey, you've incurred a great debt.
You owe money.
What do you do with that debt?
How do you pay that debt off?
Well, you would work for this person for free.
You'd become enslaved to them, an indentured servitude.
And then in time,
you'll be able to work off that debt as you work for them.
It's a great kindness.
It's closer to an employer-employee relationship than what we think of.
When we think of slavery, we think of the transatlantic slave trade, which has slave trade, just to be very different than the slavery that's talked about in scripture.
Very different.
For those of you who've been around, you hear me say this before.
I'll probably say it every time we come to this because it's such a hot topic and it probably always will be in the life of our country for as long as this country exists.
But that kind of this transatlantic slave trade was always actually forbidden in Scripture.
I can say that with confidence because the God's law forbids man stealing.
And the whole transatlantic trade, the whole slave system was predicated on men being stolen and then sold and then sold again.
So that system was always against the biblical norm.
This is a very different system.
This system that you find of slavery in Scripture is actually incredibly kind.
incredibly just and incredibly honoring.
To think, imagine if I owed an insane debt, let's say, oh, you $100,000.
How am I going to pay that off?
Well, I'm probably not.
So what do you do in that scenario?
Well, it's like you can honor that person to say, hey, I'm going to let you earn this to work this off.
And then what would happen is in the year of Jubilee in the seventh year, they would actually forgive debts and slaves would become free.
But you know what would happen oftentimes?
A slave would say, hey, my life with this master was way better than when I was trying to do this farm situation on my own.
So I'm going to, at the end of the seven years, you can be free or you can say, no, I'm just going to be with the rest of life and we're going to work together.
This is how this system worked.
And so this system here, which to our modern ears looks cruel, is actually incredibly kind, incredibly humanizing to create this system where you can work off your debt and be provided for by a good master.
In this whole situation of their dependency, the threat of death is what exposed this deep truth of the world.
Because there is a reality that none of us are free.
In the sense, we're all dependent on something.
Scripture actually says we're all enslaved to something.
We're all yoked to something.
You know, when Scripture uses that term yoked, the thing that pops into my head is an egg yoke.
That's not what it's talking about.
If that is with the image that pops in your head, it's okay.
It was for me for many years.
I knew it didn't mean that, but I love eggs.
So if you're not an egg guy, then you won't think about that.
But to be yoked to something is like you have this two oxen, you know, they got that big wooden thing that connects them together.
It's a connection.
And so if you're yoked to something, it's like where one goes, the other one goes.
You share each other's strengths.
You share each other's burden.
You're going in the same direction.
That's what that's talking about.
And there's this truth of scripture here.
You're always yoked to something.
You're always serving something.
No one is truly free to be able to do whatever they want.
Before this debt that they incurred with the state, they were dependent on so many things.
You were not thinking about it, like your daily bread, water.
We can't make the water come from the sky, for our crops.
where there's so many things, you're depending upon the sun to turn, if the sun to rise, you can't control the weather.
The coming death, their coming death made them realize that they actually have no control in their life.
This exposed the reality from it, that they are dependent on something else.
And in this moment, they chose to depend
to yoke themselves to Joseph in his kindness.
They chose to yoke themselves to him, to him to be their master.
So we're all slaves to something, but only one master can give you a slavery that leads to freedom.
You know, Romans 6 says it this way, that we're slaves to sin, we're slaves to righteousness.
And only one kind of slavery will actually look to freedom, and this is what it looks like.
And actually in Romans 6, 18,
Probably should have had this bookmarked ahead of time so you can watch how slow I am turning to Bible verses.
Not winning one of those sword drills.
I know that even the babies are crying because how slow this is.
What I say Roman six, something six to 18.
Roman six 18 says this.
And having been set free from sin, have become slaves of righteousness.
There's this truth here where freedom comes through being enslaved to Christ.
And you might say, well, how is that free?
Because of where it leads you.
It leads you to life.
The question is not do I have a master, am I enslaved?
But the question is always, who is your master?
And your fate will always be the same as your master.
This is where only slavery to Christ, only being enslaved and yoked to Him, can we taste life?
Because what a Christ do, yes, he died, but what came out on the other side of death was his life.
And as we are yoked to him, we do experience death, but that death is the very thing that leads to life.
And Joseph himself here is a preview of what Christ is offering to you and to me.
We come to Jesus, needy, broken.
We have nothing.
All we have is ourselves.
We're this living sacrifice, as Romans talks about.
We come to him, needy,
We have nothing.
We need food lest we die.
And what does Jesus offer you?
He offers Himself as that food.
He tells us that I am the bread of life.
This is what He offers you lest you die.
He gives you life.
The question is, will you follow a good master?
Christ, who dies for you?
Who leads you through death to life?
Or are you going to follow one who exploits you?
Only Christ leads to life.
And Jesus invites us into this in Matthew 11 when he says, take my yoke.
He said, take this, take this upon you.
I will carry it for you.
And when you yoke yourself to him, when you live in him, yes, you will taste death, but as he rose again, so will you rise again.
So true freedom is not found in autonomy because autonomy is not real.
It's an autonomy is an illusion.
Freedom is found when we accept what is true, that we are dependent creatures.
Nothing makes that point quite as clear as the reality of death that you cannot escape.
You cannot escape it.
It's one of those things where we're uncomfortable with it, because it's sad, it's separation, and we should be uncomfortable with it.
I'm not really dealing with this side of death.
Death is an enemy of God.
It's not the way it's supposed to be.
There's actually a great book called It's Not the Way It's Supposed to Be by Cornelius.
Planting girdle, which deals with this topic, death should not exist, but it does exist.
We live in a world that is still fallen.
There's a reality that we cannot escape on our own.
And it teaches you how dependent you are.
You're dependent creatures.
And as you're dependent creature, yoke yourself, depend on the one who can actually lead you through death
to life on the other side.
So what death does, as a way of focusing that, to see our need for dependence, to see our need for master, to choose the right master in Christ who will lead you to life.
Which leads to the third and final thing that death, I think, teaches us in this passage, which is the reality of death clarifies our hope.
The reality of death clarifies our hope.
We see this at this end from verse 27 to 31.
This final scene here begins.
It's kind of this interesting detail that thus Israel settled in the land of Egypt and land of Goshen.
And they gained possession in it and were fruitful and multiplied greatly.
Again, whenever you get these repeated phrases throughout Scripture, it should perk your ears up.
You've heard fruitful multiply.
I mean, first you hear it in the opening couple chapters of Genesis, here again to Noah.
Abraham gets it, the patriarchs of Genesis get this mantra.
And now what do you see though?
This isn't just a command, it's actually a description.
They were fruitful, they did multiply.
This is happening.
Like the promise that God gave to Abraham is actually happening.
They are multiplying greatly.
In fact, they multiply so greatly that Egypt becomes afraid of them and eventually enslaves them because they've grown so, so greatly.
fulfillment.
The only problem is, where are they?
They're in Egypt still.
They're not in the land that God had promised them.
God promised Abraham and his descendants three things, right?
A land, a people and a blessing.
They seem to be blessed.
They have the people, but they don't have the land.
So I don't know, but I imagine at least some conversation around the water cooler, I probably had those, was, hey, maybe we just stay in Egypt.
This is pretty good.
In fact, why I can say with confidence that they might have said that is because they said that when they were wandering the desert, thinking back on their slavery, they're like, hey, it was better when we were slaves, maybe we'd go back.
That leads me to believe at least some people were thinking, man, Canaan, we don't need to go back there.
Maybe that was just a test, and then this is actually God's promise time, which seemed to be doing pretty well.
I imagine that that was at least in the air, in the water, maybe Egypt's it.
And then Jesus,
Jacob's close to his last words, he speaks, he says this.
When the time drew near that Israel must die, he called his son Joseph and said, if now I have found favor in your sight, put your hand under my thigh and promised to deal kindly and truly with me, do not bury me at Egypt, but let me lie with my fathers, carry me out of Egypt and bury me in their bearing place.
saying, listen, I'm dying soon.
Do not put my bones in the ground here.
Take them.
Take them with you.
Swear it.
And I know these kind of scenes are uncomfortable.
He's putting his hand under a thigh.
What's going on there?
That's how they make covenants.
It's the strongest promise that you can make in this day.
Basically saying, listen, if you don't do this, you will die.
Serious.
Joseph does it.
He says, I swear it.
Making this covenant, this strong contract that I will bring you back, swearing on his life, saying, listen, prosperity here is nice, but you can't take it with you.
Death focuses attention in his hopes on the dreams of his beyond his life.
The dreams that he had for his very bones, which is really interesting for us.
I mean, why does he care what happens to his bones?
I mean, who cares?
You don't know what happens to him once you're gone, you're gone, right?
Why does he care where his bones are buried?
Our natural instinct was to say they don't matter anymore.
So why do they matter to him?
Because the way you treat the dead says a lot about your future hope.
I'll get into this more in a second, but this is historically why Christians have never cremated their dead.
Because they believe that their body will be raised again to new life.
And so you bury your dead in the hope of that claim.
This is Jacob.
Jacob couldn't claim the promised land at the end of his life.
He didn't care if it took his death to claim it.
He would claim it.
He would want his bones buried there to inhabit the land and death.
Why?
Because Egypt is not his home.
He knew this.
Egypt was not the thing that was promised to him.
And so burial in this way is a confession of hope.
that death is not my end.
The only reason you would care about where your bones were is if you believed you were gonna embody them again, which he does.
He's saying, listen, God will keep his promises.
He will bring them back to life where we bury our dead as a testimony of confidence.
It's declaring your hope that God will raise these bones.
That yes, death has stolen someone away from me that I love,
but he will not steal them forever.
Death does not end, its sting is removed.
God will raise his bones, we will dwell with them forever.
What we do with our dead speaks to what we believe about this, that in life or in death, God will fulfill his promises.
The reality of death clarified his hope was not in Egypt, it was in God's promises.
And when the reality of death comes before you, it does the same for you.
It clarifies what you put your hope in.
Do you put your hope in princes and the strength of princes and the mites of kingdoms of man?
Do you put your hope and your wealth?
Do you put your hope in your friends and family?
Where is it that you put your hope?
Or do you put your hope that God is growing his kingdom on earth as it is in heaven, that that will happen in our day or in the days to come, most likely the days to come.
And my bones will not stay in the ground, but they will be raised.
They will be inhabited by me again.
This is going to happen.
When we bury our dead, it's a sort of quiet defiance, not because it's practical.
It's not apparently plots of land to bury our dead if they're not cheap.
But every time we place a body in the ground, we make this quiet declaration that this is not the end, this is not the final resting place of these bones, they will come back.
They're like little seeds of the kingdom, little mustard seeds of the kingdom that we are planting in the earth, and there's nothing more mustard seedy than something dead.
We're placing something dead in the ground and saying it will not stay, that it will burst to new life.
They're mustard seeds of the kingdom that united the Christ.
They are like us claiming this earth.
Just like Jacob being buried back in the promised land was a way for him to claim the land, even in death.
Us, as we are placed in the ground here, is a way of us claiming this earth.
Because the promise that God has made to his people is not just Israel and that one little chunk of land, but that was always meant to be a testimony to the whole earth that is a bit promised to God and to God's people.
It's not as fulfilled in Christ through the church.
So every time we place a body into the ground, we're saying, this belongs to the Lord.
This is the promised land.
This land will be claimed by the Lord one day.
It's our claim of the earth that it belongs to our master.
And this truth is clarified and claimed for us.
This hope is clarified in our death.
You know, you know, Paul has these words for us that to live is Christ and to die is gain.
If those words have ever puzzled you,
To live as Christ, to die is gain.
This is what this is about.
That it's in death that our hope of life is actually seen and claimed by us.
This is why we don't have to fear it.
The way that we face death and deal with death clarifies and signifies your hope.
One more example of this.
Think about, there's a rise in practice of things like euthanasia, right, where people
Getting to the end of their life, maybe they're sick or something, and so I hate to ease the pain, ease the burden on society.
We'll just cut your life short.
Goodbye.
It's a growing practice, but what does that communicate to euthanize somebody?
What does that communicate about your hope?
Well, it says that life is only living if I'm useful to you.
Life's only worth living if I'm not in pain.
Life is about me and me alone.
This is why this is an abomination as a practice to the Christian, to the church.
Death clarifies what we have hope in.
If all we have in life is this, you gotta live and let live while you have it and then you go away, if that's all we had, then euthanasia and those kinds of things, practices make sense.
But if God is the one orchestrating, holding all things together, bringing life and death into life and life and death are in his hands and we can trust him with theirs.
You know, this week I was talking to a friend of mine who's in Virginia, he's a pastor.
And there's a couple in his church who they found out during pregnancy that the child had a rare condition and the chances of that child being born and being able to live were next to nothing.
And so they had to decide, do we abort this child or not?
And the doctor said, hey, you should probably just abort this child.
And they said, no, like listen, we believe in life.
Even if we get one second with this child, we are going to carry it to term.
And the last month of this pregnancy, the woman was several hours away on bed rest in a hospital.
And my buddy gets a call and he starts driving the husband to go meet them because the baby's coming.
And they rush into the hospital and he gets to hold his daughter for probably five seconds.
And she breathes her last.
And people on the outside might look at a story like that and like, why would you do that?
Why would you carry that child's term to spend five seconds with this daughter to put her into the ground?
Why?
She was dead before she was born, so to speak, why?
Because what we do with the dead says something about what we value and what we hope in in this world.
Because our God's the God of life.
And that one child, those five seconds, that's a testimony to the gospel.
There's a real life that's filled with the image-bearing of God.
Because that life, no matter how short, was a gift.
See, death and the reality of death and life clarify so much for us.
It says what you value.
Do you value your own comfort?
Do you value what's easy?
Or do you value those things that are eternal?
I promise you, you're gonna wake up tomorrow morning, you're pregnant, forget everything I said.
And that's most okay, but you should remember a couple of things.
These opportunities to reflect on death are few and far between.
Opportunities to reflect on death do not happen by accident in life.
Don't waste these opportunities.
Death is a fantastic teacher for you, not to steal your hope and to say, this is gonna be sad and we're all gonna die and woe as me, but to remember that death is not our end, the friends.
If you believe that, think of the courage you could have and the fearlessness you can have to live in this world that is against you.
This is what's before you this morning as we consider the life of Jacob in the end of the life of Jacob.
May we be a bold people
who did not ignore this teacher, but let it spur us on the hope and courage in this world.
Pray with me.
Merciful God, we both lament the reality of death in our world, and we also are not afraid of it, because you have stolen its sting
It does not win, you win, your life wins.
May we milk ourselves to you, and as we do, may you carry us through the valley of the shadow of death.
May you help us to fear no evil.
May you give us peace and grace to walk with you in this life, to death, to life beyond.
As we live this way, courageously and fearlessly, may our lives be a testimony to our neighbors.
I pray this in your holy name.
Amen.